W-18610079-crypto-module-upgrade-guide-k (#3036)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime: modules/ROOT/pages/cryptography-upgrading.adoc

> = Upgrading and Migrating Cryptography Module 2.0 

Reviewer: See my comment on the title and gerunds.

Upgrade Cryptography Module to version 2.x.x.
Supported Upgrade Paths

[%header,cols="50a,50a"]
|===
|From Version | To Version
|1.3.x |2.0.0
|===

== Changes in This Release

This release contains these changes:

* Changes to default values for connector operations
* Migrating your PGP Keyring to AES-Encrypted keys when operating in FIPS mode
* Using different key pairs for Sign, Encrypt, and Decrypt operations to enhance security
* Using password-based encryption
* Using BCFKS as the required keystore and truststore type
* Specifying algorithms dynamically
* Registering the XMLDSig Security Provider
* Enabling compatibility for Decrypt or Validate operations without KDF parameters

[NOTE]
Every reference to Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) in this guide pertains to FIPS version 140-2 or 140-3.

> The minimum supported Mule runtime engine version is 4.4.x to use Cryptography Module 2.0.0 and make sure compatibility with FIPS compliance and supported runtime environments.  Upgrade your Mule runtime if you are using an older version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The minimum supported Mule runtime engine version is 4.4.x to use Cryptography Module 2.0.0. Make sure compatibility with FIPS compliance and supported runtime environments.  Upgrade your Mule runtime if you use an older version.
```

== Upgrade Steps

Follow these steps to perform the upgrade:

. In Anypoint Studio, create a Mule project.
. In *Mule Palette*, click *Search in Exchange*.
. In *Add Dependencies to Project*, enter `cryptography module` in the search field.
. In *Available modules*, select *Cryptography Module* and click *Add*.
. Click *Finish*.
. Verify that the  mule-cryptography-module`  dependency version is 2.0.0 in the `pom.xml` file in the Mule project.

Studio upgrades the connector automatically.

== Post Upgrade Steps

> After upgrading Cryptography Module, be aware that the module no longer bundles security providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After upgrading Cryptography Module, the module no longer bundles security providers.
```

> If your environment already has the security providers (such as those in the MuleSoft Government Cloud environment), you don't need to do any additional configuration. The existing environment will provide ‌the security providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your environment already has the security providers (such as those in the MuleSoft Government Cloud environment), you must not do any additional configuration. The existing environment offers ‌the security providers.
```

</dependency>
----

BC dependency:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.bouncycastle</groupId>
    <artifactId>bcpg-jdk18on</artifactId>
    <version>${bcpg.version}</version>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.bouncycastle</groupId>
    <artifactId>bcprov-jdk18on</artifactId>
    <version>${bcprov.version}</version>
</dependency>
----

=== Using Bouncy Castle JDK18on Dependencies Version 1.80

Starting from Bouncy Castle version 1.80, the project version underwent a significant internal reorganization, which affects how you must include the libraries when using JDK18on artifacts, for example `bcprov-jdk18on`, `bcpg-jdk18on`.

In prior versions to version 1.80, for example 1.79 or earlier, to enable full functionality for PGP operations and password-based encryption (PBE) features, it was sufficient to add only the `bcprov-jdk18on` or `bcpg-jdk18on` libraries.

These additional libraries are mandatory because:

* `bcpkix-jdk18on` contains essential cryptographic protocol classes, for example ASN.1 structures used in PGP operations.
* `bcutil-jdk18on` includes utility classes that are now referenced by low-level operations in the other modules.

> If you don’t add these dependencies, you may encounter runtime errors such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don’t add these dependencies, you can encounter runtime errors such as:
```

* java.lang.ClassNotFoundException: org.bouncycastle.bcpg.ArmoredOutputStream
* java.lang.NoClassDefFoundError: org.bouncycastle.asn1.cryptlib.CryptlibObjectIdentifiers
* java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Attempt to override lookup strategy ParentFirstLookupStrategy for package: org.bouncycastle.asn1.nist

Therefore, if you use BC version 1.80 or higher with Cryptography Module 2.0.0 in non-FIPS mode, make sure you include these libraries in your Mule app:

* `bcprov-jdk18on`
* `bcpg-jdk18on`
* `bcpkix-jdk18on`
* `Bcutil-jdk18on`

If you prefer a FIPS-compliant environment, use the `bc-fips` and `bcpg-fips` libraries.

> == Verify the Upgrade

Reviewer: (Globally)
Be consistent in the use of gerunds (or not) for titles.

After you install the latest version of the module, verify the upgrade:

. In Studio, verify that there are no errors in the *Problems* or *Console* views.

> . Verify that there are no problems in the project `pom.xml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Verify that there are no problems in the project's `pom.xml` file.
```

. Test the connection to verify that the operations work.

== Reverting the Upgrade

> If you need to revert to the previous version of Cryptography Module, go to Anypoint Studio and do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you must revert to the previous version of Cryptography Module, go to Anypoint Studio and do the following:
```

. In the project’s `pom.xml file`, change the `mule-cryptography-module` dependency version 2.0.0 to the previous version, and delete the dependencies used from the <dependencies> section.

> . Return to the Execute tab, and in the Engine section, select one of the default engines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Return to the *Execute* tab, and in the *Engine* section, select one of the default engines.
```

> . In the Configuration XML tab, confirm the selected engine name also changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Configuration XML* tab, confirm the selected engine name also changed.
```

> == Changes to Default Values for Connector Operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Changes to Default Values for Connector Operations

```

> To improve the security posture of the Cryptography Module, many default values for operations and configuration parameters have been updated in version 2.0.0. These changes reflect the adoption of more secure algorithm stacks and modern cryptographic practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To improve the security posture of the Cryptography Module, many default values for operations and configuration parameters are updated in version 2.0.0. These changes reflect the adoption of more secure algorithm stacks and modern cryptographic practices.
```

> When migrating from a previous version, declare the default values you were relying on in version 1.x. This ensures compatibility and avoids unexpected results due to default value changes in the new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When migrating from a previous version, declare the default values you relied on in version 1.x. This ensures compatibility and avoids unexpected results due to default value changes in the new version.
```

This table provides the default values that changed in version 2.0.0:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
.Default values summary table
|===
| Component | Dafault in version 1.x | Dafault in version 2.0.0
| XML Signature Digest Algorithm | `SHA1` | `SHA512`
| JCE PBE Signature Algorithm | `PBEWithHmacSHA256` | `PBKDF2withHmacSHA512`
| JCE PBE Encryption/Decryption Algorithm | `PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_128` | `PBKDF2withHmacSHA512__AES256__CBC__PKCS5Padding`
| Checksum Algorithm | `SHA_256` | `SHA_512`
| Keystore Type | `JKS` | None, must be explicitly provided; BCFKS required in FIPS.
|===

== Migrate PGP Keyring to AES-Encrypted Keys for FIPS

To ensure your Mule app adheres to FIPS when performing PGP operations, you must migrate your PGP keyrings to utilize Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) encryption. 

> The default PGP key generation employs the CAST5 cipher, which isn’t FIPS-compliant. Using non-compliant ciphers can lead to runtime exceptions, such as `org.mule.runtime.api.exception.MuleRuntimeException` indicating issues with the signed content format and a failure in the signing operation. This exception can happen if the InputStream returned by the PGP operation is empty or corrupted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default PGP key generation employs the CAST5 cipher, which isn’t FIPS-compliant. Using non-compliant ciphers can lead to runtime exceptions, such as `org.mule.runtime.api.exception.MuleRuntimeException` indicating issues with the signed content format and a failure in the signing operation. This exception can happen if the `InputStream` returned by the PGP operation is empty or corrupted.
```

To achieve FIPS compliance for PGP signatures, follow this process:

. Create keyrings and keys
. Migrate keys to AES
. Export secret and public keys
. Configure the Cryptography Module to use the keyring

=== Create Keyrings and Keys

[NOTE]

> Create a backup of your keyrings and keys in case you need to perform a rollback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a backup of your keyrings and keys in case you must perform a rollback.
```

To create a keyring from scratch, perform ‌these steps using GNU GPG:

. Create a new keyring by running this command:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
gpg --no-default-keyring --keyring example.kbx --fingerprint
gpg: keybox '/Users/youruser/.gnupg/example.kbx' created
----

[start=2]
. Save the new keybox location to use it later.

> . Create your PGP keys for signing or validating by running this command and follow the instructions returned. (Select RSA as your cipher, because DSA isn't FIPS-compliant.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create your PGP keys for signing or validating by running this command and following the instructions returned. (Select RSA as your cipher, because DSA isn't FIPS-compliant.)
```

> . Create your PGP keys for signing or validating by running this command and follow the instructions returned. (Select RSA as your cipher, because DSA isn't FIPS-compliant.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create your PGP keys for signing or validating by running this command and following the instructions returned.
+
[NOTE]
Select RSA as your cipher, because DSA isn't FIPS-compliant.
```

[start=4]
. List your keys to find out their fingerprints before migrating them to AES by running this command:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
gpg --no-default-keyring --keyring /Users/youruser/.gnupg/example.kbx --list-secret-keys --keyid-format=long --fingerprint
/Users/youruser/.gnupg/example.kbx
-----------------------------------
sec   rsa4096/5F46261934B56AF2 2024-12-26 [SC]
      Key fingerprint = 991F 7216 B03C 0B2B 088A  B20D 5F46 2619 34B5 6AF2
uid                 [ultimate] TestName <test@example.com>
ssb   rsa4096/E7C647D222B1F1C1 2024-12-26 [E]
----

=== Migrate Keys to AES

Migrate each key to AES with SHA256 to make them FIPS compliant:

. Copy the key to migrate fingerprint.
. Paste the key in this ‌command without spaces. Note that running this command enables a command line:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
gpg --no-default-keyring --keyring /Users/youruser/.gnupg/example.kbx --s2k-cipher-algo AES256 --s2k-digest-algo SHA256 --s2k-mode 3 --s2k-count 65000000 --edit-key [KEYID]
----

[start=3]
. Enter the passwd command to change the key password. You can use the same password. A prompt requires the current password first and then the new one:

[source,xml,linenums]
----

> passwd

Reviewer: Is "passwd" OK or it should read "password". The "o" and "r" are missing.

=== Export Secret and Public Key

After migrating the keys to AES, export the secret and public keys:

. Export the secret keys in a secret keyring to be used by the `mule-cryptography-module` module by running this command. This prompts you to enter the password for each of the secret keys in the keybox:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
gpg --no-default-keyring --keyring /Users/youruser/.gnupg/example.kbx --export-secret-keys > secring_example_aes.gpg
----

. Export the public keys if needed:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
gpg --no-default-keyring --keyring /Users/youruser/.gnupg/example.kbx --export > pubring_example_aes.gpg
----

=== Troubleshoot Key Protection Issues

In some cases, even after executing:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
gpg --s2k-cipher-algo AES256 --s2k-digest-algo SHA256 --s2k-mode 3 --s2k-count 65000000 --edit-key [KEYID]
----

The key may still appear protected with AES128 and SHA1. This is due to a change introduced in GPG 2.1 and later: secret key protection is no longer managed directly by `gpg`, but by `gpg-agent`.

> In GPG 2.1 and later, `gpg` is not directly responsible for encrypting secret keys at rest and options such as `--s2k-cipher-algo` have no effect. Instead, `gpg-agent` is solely responsible and it provides no interface to change the cipher or digest algorithms in use.  For details, refer to https://www.google.com/url?q=https://dev.gnupg.org/T1800&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1748032101600550&usg=AOvVaw1WU8BTGl-579opeNkbOlL0[Allow s2k options for gpg --export-secret-key] and  https://www.reddit.com/r/GnuPG/comments/1dj4vo8/s2k_do_not_work_help/?rdt=57819[S2K do not work HELP]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In GPG 2.1 and later, `gpg` isn't directly responsible for encrypting secret keys at rest, and options such as `--s2k-cipher-algo` have no effect. Instead, `gpg-agent` is solely responsible and it provides no interface to change the cipher or digest algorithms in use.  For details, refer to https://www.google.com/url?q=https://dev.gnupg.org/T1800&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1748032101600550&usg=AOvVaw1WU8BTGl-579opeNkbOlL0[Allow s2k options for gpg --export-secret-key] and  https://www.reddit.com/r/GnuPG/comments/1dj4vo8/s2k_do_not_work_help/?rdt=57819[S2K don't work HELP]
```

In practice:

> * S2K parameters passed on the command line or stored in `gpg.conf` are not applied  when generating or editing keys in GPG 2.1+.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* S2K parameters passed on the command line or stored in `gpg.conf` aren't applied  when generating or editing keys in GPG 2.1+.
```

* `gpg-agent` uses internal defaults — typically AES128 and SHA1 — with no configuration interface to change them.

==== Alternative: Programmatic Key Generation with Bouncy Castle

> If your goal is to produce secret keys protected with specific algorithms, for example AES256 and SHA256, use Java and Bouncy Castle to generate them explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to make secret keys protected with certain algorithms, like AES256 and SHA256, use Java and Bouncy Castle to make them directly.
```

* ECDSA or RSA PKCS v1.5 algorithms are no longer allowed for encryption in FIPS environments. If you use the PGP Encrypt operation with these algorithms, you can get these errors:
** "RSA PKCS#1 v1.5 encryption disallowed"
** "Can’t use ECDSA for encryption"
** "ElGamal KeyFactory not available"
* RSA encryption using PKCS#1 v1.5 is also disabled in FIPS mode. While you can reenable it using the system property `-Dorg.bouncycastle.rsa.allow_pkcs15_enc=true`, don't enable it so you can maintain strict FIPS compliance. Enable it only if necessary and you understand the security implications.

== Use Different Key Pair for Sign, Encrypt, and Decrypt Operations
If you use the same key pair, especially when using Bouncy Castle FIPS as a security provider or running your Mule app on MuleSoft Government Cloud, you can get this error:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
org.mule.runtime.api.component.execution.ComponentExecutionException:
org.bouncycastle.crypto.IllegalKeyException: Attempt to sign/verify with RSA modulus already used for encrypt/decrypt
----

Therefore, use different key pairs for Sign, Encrypt, and Decrypt operations. 

==  Use Password-Based Encryption 

> When operating in a FIPS-enabled environment, password-based encryption (PBE) algorithms starting with PBEWith are no longer supported due to security restrictions. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using a FIPS-enabled environment, password-based encryption (PBE) algorithms starting with PBEWith are no longer supported because of security limits. For example:
```

** Temporarily enable the `com.mulesoft.crypto.allow-default-kdf-params` system property to decrypt it within FIPS, and then re-encrypt it using the new configuration. Also, in a FIPS environment, you must enable the `com.mulesoft.crypto.allow-sun-pbe-in-fips`` system property to allow the use of SUN algorithms.

== Specify Algorithms Dynamically
Cryptography Module version 2.0.0 supports dynamic algorithm definitions, offering great flexibility by removing the dependency of a predefined list of available values shown in the value provider.

You can specify dynamic algorithm definitions in two ways:

* As a complete transformation string available in your environment’s registered security providers (for example `PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_128`, `PBEwithSHA1and3-KeyDESede`, and so on).
* As a custom algorithm format introduced in version 2.0.0, which is detailed in the next section.

[NOTE]
Algorithms not present in your Mule runtime's `Security.getProviders()` list result in runtime errors. If needed, make sure you include the required cryptographic providers, for example BouncyCastle FIPS, BC non-FIPS, in your Mule app’s classpath or security configuration.

> === Use Custom Algorithm Format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Use Custom Algorithm Format

```

To enable better support for modern cryptographic configurations, especially in FIPS environments, Cryptography Module version 2.0.0 introduces a custom algorithm format that separates key derivation and encryption components.

Format:
`PBKDF2withHmac<digest>__AES<keyLength>__<mode>__<padding>`

Example:
`PBKDF2withHmacSHA512__AES256__CBC__PKCS5Padding`

This format:

* Ensures full compatibility with FIPS-approved cryptographic profiles.
* Provides explicit definition of key length, block mode, and padding.
* Enables support for future extensions without requiring changes to the connector code or Studio configuration.

> You must define all four components. Defaults aren't assumed. If any component is missing or malformed, ‌the validation fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must define all four components. Defaults aren't assumed. If a component is missing or malformed, ‌validation fails.
```

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Component| Description
| PBKDF2withHmac<digest> | Key derivation function (KDF) using HMAC + SHA512
| AES<keyLength> | Cipher algorithm with key size (128, 192, 256)
| mode | Cipher block mode (for example CBC, GCM)
| padding | Padding scheme (for example PKCS5Padding, NoPadding)
|===

Additionally, the default algorithm values are updated for stronger cryptographic guarantees:

[%header%autowidth.spread]
|===
| Operation| Default value Cryptography Module version 1.x | Default value Cryptography Module version 2.x
| *Encrypt* or *Decrypt*| `PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_128` | `PBKDF2withHmacSHA512__AES256__CBC__PKCS5Padding`
| *Sign* or *Validate* | `PBEWithHmacSHA256` | `PBKDF2withHmacSHA512
|===

> == Register the XMLDSig Security Provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Register the XMLDSig Security Provider

```

To make sure your Mule app still decrypts or validates data that was encrypted or signed using Cryptography Module version 1.x, where SALT  and `iterationCount` weren't mandatory, activate these system properties:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
com.mulesoft.crypto.allow-default-kdf-params=true
com.mulesoft.crypto.allow-sun-pbe-in-fips=true  (only necessary when running in a FIPS-enabled environment)
----

Activating these system properties enables ‌compatibility mode under these conditions:

* The operation is either Decrypt or Validate.
* The encryption algorithm is based on Sun's PBE schemes, for example, `PBEWithHmacSHA1AndAES_128`.
* Neither SALT nor `iterationCount` parameters are explicitly provided (null or empty).

If you provide a value for either SALT or `iterationCount` parameters, the module targets version 2.x compatibility and intentionally fails the operation to avoid inconsistent behavior.

This compatibility mode is intended as a temporary solution to handle existing data. For all new data, make sure you configure both SALT and `iterationCount` as required by Cryptography Module version 2.x for optimal security and behavior.

> == Use BCFKS as the Required Keystore and Truststore Type 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Use BCFKS as the Required Keystore and Truststore Type 

```

----

[start=2]
. For JKS Keystores execute this keytool command, replacing `<keystore_password>` with your current keystore password and adjusting the file paths accordingly:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
sudo /absolute/path/to/keytool_command/keytool -importkeystore -srckeystore /absolut/path/to/your/keystore/keystore.jks -srcstoretype JKS -srcstorepass changeit -destkeystore /absolute/path/to/new/keystore/keystore.bcfks -storepass <keystore_password> -deststoretype BCFKS -providerclass org.bouncycastle.jcajce.provider.BouncyCastleFipsProvider -providerpath /absolut/path/to/bcfips-1.0.2.5.jar
----

For PKCS12 Keystores if your current keystore is in PKCS12 format, simply replace -srcstoretype JKS with -srcstoretype PKCS12 in the previous command.

[NOTE]
In FIPS environments, JKS can only store certificates and can’t hold private or secret keys. JKS isn't enabled by default in Bouncy Castle FIPS. To use JKS, enable it by setting the system property:

`org.bouncycastle.jca.enable_jks=true``

JKS is no longer the default keystore type. You must explicitly select the keystore type. In FIPS environments, BCFKS is required.

== See Also

> * xref:connectors::introduction/introduction-to-anypoint-connectors.adoc[Introduction to Anypoint Connectors]

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* xref:connectors::introduction/introduction-to-anypoint-connectors.adoc[Introduction to Anypoint Connectors]
```
